[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>900 years ago, the
holy city of Jerusalem
was conquered by Christianity's
First Crusade against Islam.
The victorious crusader knights
occupied the Muslim holy sites,
including the sacred Dome of
the Rock and the nearby Al Aqsa
Mosque.
The Crusaders
believed the Al Aqsa
rested on the ancient remains
of King Solomon's temple.
And the knights who
came to live there
were known ever after
as the Knights Templar.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
At the height of their
power, the Knights
of the Temple of Solomon were
the elite military spearhead
of the medieval Catholic Church.
The knights were unique, both
warrior and monk, utterly
dedicated to killing
and dying for their God.
The Templars were the epitome
of Christianity's crusade
against Islam.
The Knights Templar were not
just front-line soldiers;
they also constructed a
remarkable supply and support
network that enveloped
every nation in Europe.
The Templar network acquired
vast business interests
in farming, shipping, and
banking, which eventually
turned the order into the most
powerful financial institution
in Europe.
In fact, the Order of
the Temple of Solomon
was the world's first
multinational corporation.
Just 200 years after
its foundation,
the Order's leaders
were burned alive
and its vast wealth seized.
Were the Templars
heretical devil worshippers
or innocent victims
of a greedy king?
Their sudden destruction was
so shocking to the people
of Europe that, for
centuries to come,
legends would grow up around the
remnants of the doomed order.
Buried treasure, secret
societies, the Turin Shroud,
and even the Holy Grail
would find their way
into the folklore of
the Knights Templar.
Could any of these fantastic
rumors possibly be true?
And if so, who has kept
their amazing secrets
for the last 700 years?
>>Pope Urban II
called what we now
describe as a crusade in 1096.
And as a consequence
of that, Latin armies
captured a number of key
places in Palestine and Syria,
including Jerusalem
and the holy places.
The problem was, however, that
when the crusade was finished,
many people left the
East, having fulfilled
their Crusades vows, and
returned to the West.
And the Crusaders were left--
the crusade settlers were
left with very little
in the way of defenses.
But this didn't stop
masses of pilgrims coming
to the East, many of
whom were unarmed,
were elderly, were vulnerable,
and needed to be defended.
And in essence,
really, the Templars
were founded by a group
of Western knights,
French knights, who were
living in the East, who
wanted to engage
in a charitable act
and perhaps also ensure their
own salvation by defending
and protecting these
groups of pilgrims
who went to see the holy places.
So in its simplest form, that's
how they came into being.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The first Templars who
dedicated their lives to God
by protecting pilgrims
in the holy land
had to give up all their
worldly possessions.
They were proud
of their poverty.
And one of the seals shows
two knights sharing a horse.
The poor knights
needed nothing to do
God's work but a
horse and a sword.
It took 10 years of
dedicated perseverance
before the Pope officially
recognized the Templars.
In the year 1129 at the
Council of Troyes in France,
the Knights Templar
became a monastic order
of the Catholic Church, the
Order of the Temple of Solomon.
The Templars had
become monks and joined
their brothers, the
Knights Hospitaller,
protecting pilgrims
as servants of God.
But not everyone
believed that it
was possible to serve
God as a warrior.
In fact, some leading clerics
believed the very idea
to be an abomination.
How could violence and
the taking of human life
be in any way reconciled
with the teachings of Jesus
Christ, who valued
patience and understanding?
>>I think the reason
that there was initially
a rather ambiguous reaction
towards the creation
of the Templar was that they
were quite-- a quite unique
creation, a combination
of monk and warrior,
which nobody had seen before.
And many men in the
12th century were uneasy
in the face of innovation,
despite the fact
that, in many ways, it was
a very innovative century
in a wide range of intellectual
and cultural fields.
So they needed time to get used
to it before they could perhaps
fully recognize its value.
So in the early
years, the Templars
didn't gain a great
deal of support.
But within about 20 years
or so of their foundation,
people began to adjust, and
the voices against the Order
became fewer and fewer and
less and less influential.
>>One of the most influential
supporters of the Templars
was the greatest church leader
of the age, the Cistercian
abbot Bernard of Clairveaux.
Bernard saw the Knights
Templar as more than warriors
fighting the flesh
and blood of Muslims.
Bernard believed the
knights were fighting evil
and were therefore
purifying the Holy Land.
In the eyes of the Church,
the Knights Templar
were not committing homicide,
but malicide, not killing man,
but evil itself.
If a Templar died in battle, he
would obtain eternal salvation
and the remission of his sin.
A Templar Knight had
no fear of death.
There could be no higher
motivation for a man
to enter battle,
and this, together
with their strict
discipline, would soon
make the Knights Templar
the most deadly fighting
unit in the Crusader armies.
In fact, the Templars
were Europe's
first professional standing
army since the Romans.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>It's important to notice that
the Templar military function
is central to the
Crusader armies.
The Templars were
governed by monastic rule,
which demanded obedience.
And this enabled them to act
in a structured and prearranged
way in a battle situation.
Here, in many ways, you have the
origins of military discipline.
And this made the Templars more
valuable to the Crusader armies
than perhaps their
numbers might suggest.
>>The Templars had strict
rules for their conduct
on the battlefield.
The grandmaster
had to be obeyed,
whatever the circumstances.
They could never leave the field
if their black and white banner
was still standing.
Knights were not
allowed to retreat
unless outnumbered by
at least three to one.
The order was forbidden
to pay ransom,
so there was no reason for
a Muslim to take them alive.
A knight in the
Temple of Solomon
would fight to the death.
Templars newly arrived
in the Holy Land
were stationed at
the headquarters
in the Temple of Solomon, their
name for the Al Aqsa Mosque.
The Templar compound
included the mosque,
the entire southern end of the
platform on which it rested,
and even below the
platform's surface.
Here, there was another
mosque, the Marwani
where the Templars kept
their horses and camels
and which the Crusaders
believed to have
been the stables
of King Solomon.
Today, the Marwani is
rarely seen by non-Muslims.
Although the Templars
lived and worked
in the sacred Islamic buildings,
it was the Christian sites
that they were there to protect.
The most important
Christian site of all
was the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre, built
on Calvary, the rock on
which Jesus Christ had
been crucified.
Today, the Church
still bears the myriad
of crosses carved into the
walls by these pious Crusaders
nearly 900 years ago.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Beyond the relative
safety of Jerusalem
were the numerous
Biblical holy sites
that required pilgrims to
journey along lonely roads
and through dangerous
and inhospitable country.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Templars built
fortifications and bases,
set up patrols and
provided beast and supplies
for weary pilgrims.
It was not long before
the discipline and skill
of the Templar Knights
demonstrated to all
that they were capable
of far more than just
protecting pilgrims.
>>One of the most
important early examples
of Templar military
skill is their role
in the reorganization
and the protection
of the army of King
Louis VII of France
during the Second Crusade, which
in the course of 1147, 1148,
was trying the very difficult
feat of crossing Asia Minor
and was suffering, both
from the environment
and from Turkish attack.
The Templars were entrusted
with reorganizing the army
and with defending it.
And that enabled what
was left of that army
to cross Asia Minor without
too many further mishaps.
And that did greatly enhance
the Templars' reputation.
>>The Second Crusade also saw
the Knights Templar awarded
the right to wear their
distinctive red cross.
The cross, with its splayed
ends, was at the time
unique to the Templars.
Their flowing white
robes and the red cross
fueled their growing sense
of collective identity.
This military uniform was just
one of the many innovative ways
that the Knights Templar
foreshadowed a modern army.
Their main weapon, however,
had been tried and tested
over generations.
>>The cavalry charge
was their-- effectively
their only offensive tactic.
Now of course, they developed
other things to back this up.
Infantry played an
absolutely essential role,
because they provided the
launch pad, the defended entity,
even within an open battle,
from which the armored cavalry
launched their charge.
And they had other
troops as well.
They had light cavalry,
the famous turcopoles.
And the Templars
had all these units.
>>The Templar's famous
turcopoles were former Muslims
who had converted
to Christianity
and who, like the
Templars themselves,
could be counted on
to fight to the death,
as they also faced
immediate execution if they
were captured.
Horses were vital
to the Crusaders,
not just for warfare, but for
communications and transport.
Templar care of horses
was second to none,
as they were expensive,
did not live long,
were particularly vulnerable
to sickness in the Holy Land,
and soon learned to fear battle.
As a result, the decision
to deploy a cavalry charge
was not taken lightly.
And Templar military
policy in the Holy Land
was, on the whole, cautious.
As the skill and reputation
of the Templars began to grow,
so did their role in the overall
defense of the Crusader states.
In the second half
of the 12th century,
the Crusaders' 400-mile
coastal strip of the Holy Land
was based around the
cities of Antioch, Tripoli,
and the capital, Jerusalem.
The Christians controlled
the Mediterranean,
which was vital for
supplies, especially
through the Port of
Acre, while mountains
on the eastern frontier
and the River Jordan
provided excellent
natural defenses.
Castles and fortifications,
many of them Templar,
guarded the main entry points
into the Christian states.
Although the Christian
sliver of the Holy Land
was surrounded by Islam,
political and religious
divisions had prevented
any unified attempt
to drive the Christians out.
When the Sunnis from Syria
imposed their orthodoxy
on Shia Egypt, the Crusaders
faced a united Islamic frontier
for the very first time.
In 1178, the Templars began
construction of a new castle
at Jacob's Ford, where the main
road from Cairo to Damascus
crossed the River Jordan.
>>The most important road
between Syria and Palestine
passes very close to the castle.
You can see it-- you
can still see it now.
You can see the
metal road, which
leads from Palestine
to the Golan Heights.
And from there, hopefully
very soon, to Damascus.
This is the old VMIs, which
goes from Egypt to Damascus
and crosses the Jordan
in this crucial site.
There are only few
hundreds of meters
where the roads can
cross the Jordan River.
But until 1178, this crossing,
this vadum, this fault,
the faults of the Jordan, were
not protected by the Franks.
In 1178, a year after
a very decisive victory
of the Franks over
the Muslim enemies,
the Knight Templars succeeded
to convince the king
to build a new castle very
close to Damascus, two days'
walk from Damascus, and in a
territory which was considered
by both Franks and Muslims
as a Muslim territory.
>>The Templars' newly
built castle on the Jordan
was in just too important
a location for Saladin
to do nothing.
In the year 1179, he
moved to destroy it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
With so much at
stake, the Templars
had no choice but to abandon
their policy of caution.
They launched a
relief expedition,
which Saladin intercepted
and destroyed.
The grandmaster, the
highest ranking Templar,
was captured and
later died in prison.
Saladin's first great invasion
of the Christian state
came not long afterwards.
The Templars once more
put their faith in God
and launched their
heavy cavalry charge
against a numerically
superior enemy.
The charge caught the
Muslim forces by surprise
and inflicted a crushing defeat.
The Templars deployed
the same proven tactics
a few years later
in 1187, when they
discovered one of Saladin's
armies had crossed the Jordan
and was reconnoitering around
the Springs of Cresson.
The Templars once more
put their faith in God
and launched a
cavalry charge right
into the heart of a Muslim
force at least three times
their size.
This time, the cavalry failed.
60 Templar Knights
died, and just three
escaped the massacre.
>>The cavalry charge failed,
on almost every occasion
when it did fail, because
it failed to hit its target.
It just missed.
And this is an absolutely
fundamental point
that has to be emphasized
in military history.
The cavalry charge was
unstoppable, almost
unstoppable, if
it hit its target.
The Muslims' increasing ability
to counter the Crusaders'
offensive tactics was
not enough to explain
why God had apparently deserted
his most loyal servants.
Some Christians felt that
Templar pride must be to blame.
What the Templars saw as
a noble collective spirit
seemed to many to be merely
arrogance and conceit.
Some believed the Holy
Land itself was now
threatened by their Godlessness.
For the Muslims,
their great victory
at the Springs of Cresson
was a huge morale booster.
And a few weeks later,
Saladin assembled the largest
ever Muslim army.
By the end of June
1187, the Muslims
had mustered an
army of 45,000 men,
including 12,000 light cavalry.
The Crusaders had
just over 20,000,
including nearly 6,000 cavalry.
On July 1, Saladin
crossed the River Jordan
and laid siege to the
Christian-held city
of Tiberius.
The Christian leadership
feared a trap.
But finally, urged on by
many, including the Templar
grandmaster, they decided
to try and relieve Tiberius.
The Crusaders dry
and tortuous route
would take them
past a landmark hill
called the Horns of Hattin.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
At the Horns of Hattin,
Saladin's army was waiting.
The Christians were
enveloped and crushed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Thousands of Christians
were killed and captured.
Nearly all of the Crusaders
were released for ransom,
except for the knights
of the military orders,
the Hospitallers
and the Templars.
>>Following the
battle of Hattin,
the captured members, or at
least knights, of the Temple,
and I believe the Hospital
as well, were executed.
Now, this sounds incredibly
brutal and ruthless,
but I think what you have to
bear in mind is that Saladin
recognized that these
were dangerous, dedicated,
implacable foes.
>>As one Muslim
chronicle put it,
they were the fiery heart
of the Frankish armies.
They were the best disciplined.
They were well equipped.
They were committed.
And they were permanent.
And I think Saladin's
aim there is really
to try to eliminate what he
saw as the core of the Frankish
armies so that in the future the
land reconquered by the Muslims
would remain in Muslim hands.
>>Saladin had also captured
a large number of them.
So, executing them might,
from his point of view,
break the back of
the organization.
It's not merely a matter of
vengeance against a feared foe.
in fact, I don't think
it's even vengeance at all.
This was a rather
cold; calculating;
and, seen from a modern point
of view, ruthless action.
But it made sense at the time.
>>I also think that he did
it-- he executed the Templars
and Hospitallers after
the Battle of Hattin.
I think he did that also because
it enhanced his own image
as a holy war
leader, as a leader
of the jihad and, therefore,
somebody who's, in the future,
a hero of Islam.
>>In the space of six months,
half of the Templars' Holy Land
army had been killed and
not a single fortification
remained with a full garrison.
The Order of the
Temple of Solomon
had lost 230 knights
at Hattin and 60
at the Springs of Cresson.
With the destruction
of the Templar force,
the mainstay of the
Crusade estate was gone.
Saladin, having destroyed the
Christian field army at Hattin,
moved to capture the
Crusader coastal ports
to prevent any reinforcements
getting through
to the Christians by sea.
One week after Hattin, Saladin
captured the key port of Acre.
His main army moved on
south, and in October,
took Jerusalem itself.
Over the next few months,
Saladin recovered nearly all
of the land lost to the
First Crusaders almost
a century before.
Only the arrival of the
German Crusader Conrad
of Montferrat at Tyre
prevented its fall.
This toehold and a
few meager garrisons
at Antioch and
Tripoli were all that
remained of the
Christian Holy Land.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
On liberating Jerusalem, Saladin
entered the Dome of the Rock
and conducted a
purifying ceremony.
Rose water was used to wash
away all trace of Crusaders,
who had defiled the holy site.
The capture of Jerusalem
was the crowning moment
of a monumental career,
which had seen Saladin
unite the Islamic world
and drive out nearly all
the Crusaders from
the Holy Land.
The Templars had been almost
eliminated from the East.
But incredibly, they
had prepared themselves
for a disaster on
even this scale.
Since their foundation,
they had been constructing
an enormous support network.
This multinational
corporation had headquarters
in London and Paris and
was built with one aim,
to finance the Order's
front-line operations
in the East.
The Templars would
soon get their chance
to begin the fight back.
Saladin's victories
had sent shock waves
through Christian
Europe and ignited
a fever of religious enthusiasm.
The result would be the Third
Crusade, which in the year 1189
would set out to
recover the Holy Land.
[MUSIC PLAYING]